StateDB in Cilium guide (#34686)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/development/statedb.rst

the syntax ``+cilium_<name>``, where ``<name>`` is the name of the metric in the table below.
For example, here is how to turn on all the metrics:

.. code-block:: yaml

  prometheus:
    enabled: true
    metrics:
    - +cilium_statedb_write_txn_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_write_txn_acquisition_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_table_contention_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_table_objects
    - +cilium_statedb_table_revision
    - +cilium_statedb_table_delete_trackers
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_objects
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_low_watermark
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_cleaning_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_reconciler_count
    - +cilium_reconciler_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_reconciler_errors_total
    - +cilium_reconciler_errors_current
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_count
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_errors_total
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_duration_seconds

These are still under development and the metric names may change. We also do not
as of yet have a grafana dashboard template for these.

TODO: update the dashboard from 
https://github.com/joamaki/cilium/blob/pr/joamaki/bpf-ops-service-map/demo/

> StateDB

Reviewer: Should we keep all metrics in one place, ex. https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/observability/metrics/?

Author: I would probably hold off a bit from that as I expect these to still change and don’t want to give the wrong impression on their stability. But yes eventually they should go there (and be autogenerated)

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _statedb:

StateDB in Cilium
=================

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

`StateDB <https://github.com/cilium/statedb>`_ is an in-memory database developed

> for the Cilium project for management of control-plane state. It aims to simplify access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the Cilium project to manage control-plane state. It aims to simplify access
```

control-plane state from the controllers that operates on it. 

This document focuses on how StateDB is leveraged by Cilium and how to develop new
features using it. For a detailed guide on StateDB API itself see the 
`StateDB documentation <https://github.com/cilium/statedb/blob/main/README.md>`_.

We assume familiarity with the Hive framework. If you're not familiar with it,
consider reading through :ref:`guide-to-the-hive` first.

The Why
~~~~~~~

StateDB is a result of painful lessons learned from development struggles and production incidents. It aims to be
a tool to systematically improve the resilience, testability and inspectability of the Cilium agent.

For developers it aims to offer simpler and safer ways to extend the agent by giving a unified
API (`Table[Obj]`) for accessing shared state. The immutable data structures backing StateDB allow for 
lockless readers which improves resiliency compared to the RWMutex+hashmap+callback pattern 
where a bug in a controller observing the state may cause critical functions to either stop or significantly
decrease throughput. Additionally having flexible ways to access and index the state allows for opportunities to deduplicate

> state. Many components of the agent has historically functioned through callback-based subscriptions to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the state. Many components of the agent have historically functioned through callback-based subscriptions
```

and maintained their own copies of state which has a significant impact on memory usage and GC overhead.

Unifying state storage behind a database-like abstraction allows building reusable utilities for
inspecting the state (`cilium-dbg statedb`), reconciling state (StateDB reconciler) and observing
operations on state (StateDB metrics). At scale this leads to an architecture that is easier to 
understand (smaller API surface), operate (state can be inspected) and extend (easy to access data).

The separation of state from logic operating on it (e.g. moving away from kitchen-sink `Manager` pattern)
also opens up the ability to do wider and more meaningful integration testing on components of the agent. 
When most of the inputs and outputs of a component are tables, we can combine multiple components into an

> integration test that is solely defined in terms of test inputs and expected outputs. This allows more validation to be performed with fairly simple integration tests rather than with the slower and costly end-to-end tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
integration test that is solely defined in terms of test inputs and expected outputs. This allows more validation to be performed with fairly simple integration tests rather than with slower and costly end-to-end tests.
```

Architecture vision
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. image:: _static/arch.svg
	:align: center

> The agent in this architectural style can be roughly thought of consisting of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agent in this architectural style can be broadly considered to consist of:
```

- *User intent tables*: objects from external data sources that tell the agent what it should do. These would be for example the Kubernetes core objects like Pods or the Cilium specific CRDs such as CiliumNetworkPolicy, or data ingested from other sources such as kvstore.

- *Controllers*: control-loops that observe the user intent tables and compute the
  contents of the desired state tables.

> - *Desired state tables*: the internal state that the controllers produce to succintly describe what should be done. For example a desired state table could describe what the contents of a BPF map should be or what routes should be installed.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Desired state tables*: the internal state that the controllers produce to succinctly describe what should be done. For example, a desired state table could describe what the contents of a BPF map should be or what routes should be installed.

```

* By defining the controller as essentially the function from input tables to output tables it becomes easy to understand and test.

* Separating the reconciliation from the desired state computation the complex logic of dealing with low-level errors and retrying is separate from the pure "business logic" computation.

* Using the generic reconcilers allows using tried-and-tested and instrumented retry implementation.

* The control-plane of the agent is essentially everything outside the reconcilers This allows us to integration test, simulate or benchmark the control-plane code without unreasonable amount of scaffolding. The easier it is to write reliable integration tests the more resilient the codebase becomes.

What we're trying to achieve is well summarized by Fred Brooks in "The Mythical Man Month":

	| Show me your flowchart and conceal your tables, and I shall continue to be mystified.

> 	| Show me your tables, and I won't usually need your flowchart; it'll be obvious.

Reviewer: ❤️

* If the object is small (<100 bytes) prefer storing it by value instead of by reference, e.g. `Table[MyObject]` instead of `Table[*MyObject]`. This reduces memory fragmentation and makes it safer to use since the fields can't be accidentally mutated (anything inside that's by reference of course can be mutated accidentally). Note though that each index will store a separate copy of the object. Measure if needed.

With that out of the way, let's get concrete with a code example of a simple
table and a controller that populates it:

FIXME: put the code into files that we test and include it here.

.. code-block:: go

	// Example is our object that we want to index and store in a table.
	type Example struct {
		ID uint64
		Label string
	}

	// TableHeader defines how cilium-dbg displays the header
	func (e *Example) TableHeader() []string {
		return []string{
			"ID",
			"Label",
		}
	}

	// TableRow defines how cilium-dbg displays a row
	func (e *Example) TableRow() []string {
		return []string{
			strconv.FormatUint(e.ID, 10, 64),
			e.Label,
		}
	}

	// TableName is a constant for the table name. This is used in cilium-dbg

> 	// to refer to this table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// to refer to this table. The TableName must be composed of lowercase letters, separated by hyphens, and its total length cannot exceed X characters.
```
TODO, we should define a maximum limit of characters we can set on a table

Author: please review: https://github.com/cilium/statedb/pull/52

				id = 0
			}
			wtxn.Commit()

			// Report the health of the job. This can be inspected with
			// "cilium-dbg status --all-health" or with "cilium-dbg statedb health".
			health.OK(fmt.Sprintf("%d examples inserted", id))
		}
	}

	func registerExampleController(jg job.Group, db *statedb.DB, examples statedb.RWTable[Example]) {
		// Construct the controller and add the loop() method as a one-shot background
		// job to the module's job group.
		// When the controller doesn't have any useful API to outside we can use this
		// pattern instead of "Provide(NewController)" to keep things internal.
		ctrl := &exampleController{db, examples}
		jg.Add(job.OneShot(
			"loop",
			ctrl.loop,
		))
	}

To understand how the table defined by our example module can be consumed, we can
construct a small mini-application:

.. code-block:: go

	func dumpExamples(jg job.Group, db *statedb.DB, table statedb.Table[examples.Example]) {
		jg.Add(job.OneShot(
			"dump",
			func(ctx context.Context, _ cell.Health) error {
				// Start tracking changes to the table. This instructs the database
				// to keep deleted objects off to the side for us to observe.
				wtxn := db.WriteTxn(table)

> 				changes, err := table.Changes(wtxn)

Reviewer: Any particular reason we need the WriteTxn and ReadTxn is not enough? ( I know the interface signature requires WriteTxn but wondering why?)

txn usage in Changes()
* itxn := txn.getTxn() -> Taken from ReadTxn anyway
* t.Revision(txn) -> which taxes the ReadTxn
* t.LowerBoundWatch(txn..) -> same

Author: The reason why `Changes` needs it is that it actually does modify the table:
https://github.com/cilium/statedb/blob/main/txn.go#L265. 

I did at some point think about it internally doing the WriteTxn, but in the end I think this way it's transparent, safer and it's also obvious to the user how this gets sequenced with other WriteTxn's. E.g. This locks the table and we'll see the objects deleted after we `Commit` this `WriteTxn`.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _statedb:

StateDB in Cilium
=================

.. warning::

   StateDB and the reconciler are still under active development and the APIs & metrics documented
   here are not guaranteed to be stable yet.

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

`StateDB <https://github.com/cilium/statedb>`__ is an in-memory database developed
for the Cilium project to manage control-plane state. It aims to simplify access
and indexing of state and to increase resilience, modularity and testability by separating the
control-plane state from the controllers that operates on it. 

This document focuses on how StateDB is leveraged by Cilium and how to develop new
features using it. For a detailed guide on StateDB API itself see the 
`StateDB documentation <https://github.com/cilium/statedb/blob/main/README.md>`__.

We assume familiarity with the Hive framework. If you're not familiar with it,
consider reading through :ref:`guide-to-the-hive` first.

> The Why

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Motivation
```

Author: 👍

	| Show me your flowchart and conceal your tables, and I shall continue to be mystified.
	| Show me your tables, and I won't usually need your flowchart; it'll be obvious.

Defining tables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`StateDB documentation <https://github.com/cilium/statedb/blob/main/README.md>`__ gives a good introduction into how to create a table and its indexes, so we won't repeat that here, but instead focus on Cilium specific details.

Let's start off with some guidelines that you might want to consider:

* By default publicly provide ``Table[Obj]`` so new features can build on it and it can be used in tests. Also export the table's indexes or the query functions (``var ByName = nameIndex.Query``).

* Do not export ``RWTable[Obj]`` if outside modules do not need to directly write into the table. If other modules do write into the table, consider defining "writer functions" that validate that the writes are well-formed.

* If the table is closely associated with a specific feature, define it alongside the implementation of the feature. If the table is shared by many modules, consider defining it in ``daemon/k8s`` or ``pkg/datapath/tables`` so it is easy to discover.

> * Make sure the object can be JSON marshalled so it can be inspected. If you need to store non-marshallable data (e.g. functions), make them private or mark them with ``json:"-"`` struct tag.

Reviewer: should private fields be printed to the CLI and have a placeholder or just be ignored?

Author: Just ignored since they can't be transferred. If one needs to show information in a field that's not marshallable then you need a separate field to summarize that info for json marshalling (e.g. for `cilium-dbg statedb` commands and dumping).

* Write benchmarks for your table to understand the cost of the indexing and storage use. See ``benchmarks_test.go`` in ``cilium/statedb`` for examples.

* If the object is small (<100 bytes) prefer storing it by value instead of by reference, e.g. ``Table[MyObject]`` instead of ``Table[*MyObject]``. This reduces memory fragmentation and makes it safer to use since the fields can't be accidentally mutated (anything inside that's by reference of course can be mutated accidentally). Note though that each index will store a separate copy of the object. Measure if needed.

With that out of the way, let's get concrete with a code example of a simple
table and a controller that populates it:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../contrib/examples/statedb/example.go
   :language: go

To understand how the table defined by our example module can be consumed, we can
construct a small mini-application:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../contrib/examples/statedb/main.go
   :language: go

You can find and run the above examples in ``contrib/examples/statedb``:

> .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell-session
```

* Query is made with ReadTxn and results are used in a WriteTxn. The results may have changed between the ReadTxn and WriteTxn! If you want optimistic concurrency control, then use CompareAndSwap in the write transaction.

cilium-dbg statedb
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

StateDB implements a simple HTTP API for querying tables from a separate process.
The objects are marshalled and unmarshalled using the normal Go JSON facilities,
so we can effectively get copies of the objects into a separate process using the
HTTP API which we can then render or process.

The ``cilium-dbg statedb <command>`` provides a table-based view into the StateDB
tables running in the agent in a style similar to "kubectl get". Watching the
tables for changes is also supported with the ``--watch`` flag.

To get your newly defined table to be part of this, there's only two things you
need to do: implement the *TableRow* and *TableHeader* methods for the object (see above)
and add a one-liner to ``cilium-dbg/cmd/statedb.go``:

.. code-block:: go

	func init() {
		...
		StatedbCmd.AddCommand(
			...
			statedbTableCommand[example.Example](example.TableName),
		)
	}

We can now dump the contents of our example table:

> .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell-session
```

Although the pound sign will mess up formatting a bit (it will be considered as a prompt symbol).

	$ cilium-dbg statedb examples
	# ID      Label
	123       hello  

Kubernetes reflection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To reflect Kubernetes objects from the API server into a table, the reflector
utility in ``pkg/k8s`` can be used to automate this. For example, we can define
a table of pods and reflect them from Kubernetes into the table:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../contrib/examples/statedb_k8s/pods.go
   :language: go

As earlier, we can then construct a small application to try this out:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../contrib/examples/statedb_k8s/main.go
   :language: go

You can run the example in ``contrib/examples/statedb_k8s`` to watch the pods in
your current cluster:

> .. code-block:: shell
> 
>     contrib/examples/statedb_k8s$ go run . --k8s-kubeconfig-path ~/.kube/config
>     level=info msg=Starting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell-session
    $ contrib/examples/statedb_k8s$ go run . --k8s-kubeconfig-path ~/.kube/config
    level=info msg=Starting
```

Reviewer 2: Woops sorry I didn't mean to remove the blank line separator :grimacing:

Reviewer 2: Looks like you kept it though :relieved:

    time="2024-09-05T11:22:15+02:00" level=info msg="Establishing connection to apiserver" host="https://127.0.0.1:44261" subsys=k8s-client
    time="2024-09-05T11:22:15+02:00" level=info msg="Connected to apiserver" subsys=k8s-client
    level=info msg=Started duration=9.675917ms
    Pod(default/nginx): Running (revision: 1, deleted: false)
    Pod(kube-system/cilium-envoy-8xwp7): Running (revision: 2, deleted: false)
    ...

> Reconcilers

Reviewer: Should we add some details around the difference of using table pointers in context of reconcilers?

Author: Yes! I'll add some points about it.

~~~~~~~~~~~

The StateDB reconciler can be used to reconcile changes on table against a
target system.

To set up the reconciler you will need the following.

> Add ``reconciler.Status`` as a field into your object (there can be multiple):

Reviewer: what about the index for the status?

Author: Not needed usually, unless the upside of quickly looking up e.g. pending objects outweigh downsides/overhead of maintaining a separate status index. There has not been a case like that yet so I wouldn't document it.

	...
	// If the returned error is not nil error is logged and metrics incremented. Failed pruning is currently not retried,
	// but called periodically according to config.
	return err
  }

Register the reconciler:

.. code-block:: go

  func registerReconciler(
    params reconciler.Params,
	ops reconciler.Operations[*MyObject],
	tbl statedb.RWTable[*MyObject],
  ) error {
    // Reconciler[..] is an API the reconciler provides. Often not needed.
	// Currently only contains the Prune() method to trigger immediate pruning.
    var r reconciler.Reconciler[*MyObject]
    r, err := RegisterReconciler(
      params,
	  tbl,
	  (*MyObject).Clone,
	  (*MyObject).SetStatus,
	  (*MyObject).GetStatus,
	  ops,
	  nil, /* optional batch operations */
	)
	return err
  }

  var Cell = cell.Module(
	"example",
	"Example module",
	...,
	cell.Invoke(registerReconciler),
  )

Insert objects with the ``Status`` set to pending:

.. code-block:: go

  var myObjects statedb.RWTable[*MyObject] 

  wtxn := db.WriteTxn(myObjects)
  myObjects.Insert(wtxn, &MyObject{ID: 123, Status: reconciler.StatusPending()})
  wtxn.Commit()

> The reconciler watches the tables (using ``Changes()``) and will call ``Update`` for each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reconciler watches the tables (using ``Changes()``) and calls ``Update`` for each
```

Nit: We recommend using present tense

be out-of-date, so if things are not working, check the source code.

The metrics can be enabled by adding them to the helm ``prometheus.metrics`` option with
the syntax ``+cilium_<name>``, where ``<name>`` is the name of the metric in the table below.
For example, here is how to turn on all the metrics:

.. code-block:: yaml

  prometheus:
    enabled: true
    metrics:
    - +cilium_statedb_write_txn_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_write_txn_acquisition_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_table_contention_seconds
    - +cilium_statedb_table_objects
    - +cilium_statedb_table_revision
    - +cilium_statedb_table_delete_trackers
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_objects
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_low_watermark
    - +cilium_statedb_table_graveyard_cleaning_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_reconciler_count
    - +cilium_reconciler_duration_seconds
    - +cilium_reconciler_errors_total
    - +cilium_reconciler_errors_current
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_count
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_errors_total
    - +cilium_reconciler_prune_duration_seconds

These are still under development and the metric names may change. We also do not

> as of yet have a grafana dashboard template for these.

Reviewer 2: “as of yet” is tricky in docs. How about creating an issue to track this and pointing to it in the docs?

Author: I'll drop this. It's not yet entirely clear if/how/when we'll do a dashboard for the reconciler metrics.
